[README](/README.md) > **Background**

# Background
**DARPA** announced [**Software Defined Hardware (SDH)**](https://www.darpa.mil/program/software-defined-hardware)[^2], a program that aims "*to build runtime-reconfigurable hardware and software that enables near ASIC performance without sacrificing programmability for data-intensive algorithms.*" **NVIDIA** leading the charge on the program, internally called, [**Symphony**](https://blogs.nvidia.com/blog/2018/07/24/darpa-research-post-moores-law/). Our work is a small but important piece of this larger puzzle. The "data-intensive algorithms" part of the program includes domains like Machine Learning, Graph Processing, Sparse-Matrix-Vector algorithms, etc. where there is a large amount of data available to be processed. And the problems being addressed are either already based on irregular data structures and workloads, or are trending towards it (such as sparse machine learning problems). For these irregular workload computations to be successful, we require efficient load-balancing schemes targetting specialized hardware such as the GPUs or Symphony.

[^2]: [DARPA Selects Teams to Unleash Power of Specialized, Reconfigurable Computing Hardware](https://www.darpa.mil/news-events/2018-07-24a)

## A small (and important) piece of a larger puzzle.
The predominant approach today to addressing irregularity is to build application-dependent solutions. These are not portable between applications. This is a shame because We believe the underlying techniques that are currently used to address irregularity have the potential to be expressed in a generic, portable, powerful way. We build a generic open-source library for load balancing that will expose high-performance, intuitive load-balancing strategies to any irregular-parallel application.

## Load-balancing problem, and a silver lining.
Today's GPUs follow a Single Instruction Multiple Data (SIMD) model, where different work components (for example a node in a graph) are mapped to a single thread. Each thread runs a copy of the program and threads run in parallel (this is a simple explanation, there are other work units in NVIDIA's GPUs such as warps, cooperative thread arrays, streaming multiprocessors etc.). Let's take a graph problem as an example to understand load imbalance. One key operation in graph problems is traversal, given a set of vertices, a traversal operation visits all the neighboring vertices of the input. If we naïvely map each input vertex to a GPU thread it can result in a massive imbalance of work. As some threads within the GPU will get a lot more work than others, causing inefficient utilization of hardware resources. In our example; this could happen for a social-network graph where one input vertex may have millions of connections while other input vertices in the same traversal pass may only have tens of neighbors.

The silver lining here is that there are more intelligent workload mappings that address this problem the load imbalance problem for various types of graphs and other irregular workloads. We extend these previously tightly-coupled scheduling algorithms to an abstraction.
